---
layout: post
published: false
title: Install Apache HTTP Web Server on Azure Virtual Machines
categories:
  - Web Application
tags:
  - Python
  - 'Azure '
  - Cloud Service
  - Flask
  - Ubuntu
subtitle: Set up a Virtual Private Server for Deploying Flask Applications
---

Apache HTTP Server is the most used web server software in the world and public cloud services, such as Amazon Web Services and Microsoft Azure, make setting up a Virtual Private Server(VPS) hosting web applications a lot easier than traditional way that using physical servers. As many tutorials on traditional web hosts are focusing on settings to run PHP and/or .NET applications, in this post I will go through the steps of installing and configuring Apache HTTP Web Server on an Azure Ubuntu Virtual Machine to host Flask Web applications writtern in Python 3. <!--more-->

## Set up Linux Virtual Machines on Azure
You can follow the steps from [Azure Linux Virtual Machines Quickstarts](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/linux/) to create a virtual machine running Ubuntu. The quickstart also provide steps of installing a NGINX webserver on the virtual machine. 

One of the steps is to create SSH key pair, if you don't have an existing one. You can run following command in a Bash shell, e.g. Git Bash on Windows. Follow the on-screen directions to privide file path and name for the public key file. 
```
ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 2048
```

## Settings for Connection to Virtual Machine
After deloyment of virtual machine, there are two things you need to set in order to connect to the virtual machine.
* Reset password through the **Reset password** tab on the left-hand menu
* Open port 80 for web traffic. Click **Networking** tab on the left-hand menu, and then **Add inbound port rule**, select type **http** from the **Service** dropbox.

You can run `ssh lei@xx.xxx.xxx.xxx` in your bash shell to connect to your virtual machine. The `xx.xxx.xxx.xxx` in the command is the public IP address, you can get it from the overview page of your virtual machine.

If you are using Windows, you might want to use WinSCP and/or PuTTYY to connect to the virtual machine. Refer to [https://winscp.net/eng/download.php](https://winscp.net/eng/download.php) to download WinSCP and PuTTY. You might need to set the proxy in the WinSCP, if you behind a proxy server. Note: there is no http:// in the proxy host name.

## Install Apache HTTP Web Server

To install the Apache web server you need to run the following:
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install apache2
```
The `apach2` in the command is our web server. It will listen for web requests (which are generated by our users visiting our web application using their browsers) and hand these requests over to our web application. 



## Install WSGI
As our application is in Python, we also need WSGI (Web Server Gateway Interface).
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install libapache2-mod-wsgi   # for python 2.7
sudo apt-get install libapache2-mod-wsgi-py3  #for python 3
```
This is a common interface between web servers and Python applications, which allows Apache to talk to Flask and vice versa. An overview of the architecture can be seen in the following diagram:


## Install Python Virtual Environment

After login to your virtual machine, you can check your python versions and pip version through running following commands. 

```
python --version
python3 --version
```
You might have both python2.7 and python 3.x pre-installed. 

If you want to use python 2.7, you have to check the pip version through running 
```
pip --version
```
If `pip` is not currently installed yet, you can run following commands to install pip for python 2.7.
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install python-pip
```
You can install and use `virtualenv` for python 2.7 thorugh
```
sudo pip install virtualenv
virtualenv <DIR>
source <DIR>/bin/activate
```

If you want to use python 3, since both `pip` and `virtualenv` are bundled with python > 3.4. So you can run 
```
python3 -m venv <DIR>
```
to create a virtual environment for python 3. Sometimes the `venv` is not pre-installed, then you need to install the `python3-venv` package using following command.
 ```
 sudo apt-get install python3-venv
 ```
 After creating the virtual environment. You can use following commands to activate and deactivate the built virutal environment.
 ```
source  <DIR>/bin/activate
deactivate
```
## Install Flask





## References

* [Azure Linux Virtual Machines Quickstarts](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/linux/)
